TT-7903 DX-661 document otel tracing concepts (#3212)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/distributed-tracing/open-telemetry/open-telemetry-overview.md

---

> title: "Open Telemetry"

Reviewer: OpenTelemetry

description: Overview page to introduce OpenTelemetry in Tyk
---

Since v5.2.+ Tyk now supports OpenTelemetry, a robust observability framework for cloud-native software. Enhance your API Gateway's monitoring capabilities with customizable traces and metrics.

> ## Enabling OpenTelemetry in Two Steps

Reviewer 2: Let's explain how to configure connection to opentelemetry backend first. Provide links to example integrations here.

Author: @caroltyk we have a different ticket to document integrations, do you think it should go in a different page and here only set a link? This is the ticket https://tyktech.atlassian.net/browse/TT-9797

Reviewer 2: We can provide a link here.

Author: @caroltyk agree, so far I cannot add the link as the page doesn't exist yet, and I need a valid url otherwise the project doesn't compile. So, I will leave it on-hold until we merge the work from @mativm02 and we can add a valid link

### Step 1: Enable at Gateway Level
First, you need to enable OpenTelemetry in the Tyk Gateway. You can do this by editing the Tyk Gateway configuration file like so:

```json
{
"opentelemetry": {
  "enabled": true
  }
}
```

You can also enable OpenTelemetry by setting the corresponding environment variable: `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED`.

> ### Step 2: Enable at API Level
> After enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you can activate it for specific APIs you wish to monitor. To do so, edit the respective API definition and set the `detailed_tracing` option to either true or false.

Reviewer 2: Is it an optional step, since detailed_tracing should have a default value set to false?

```suggestion
### Step 2: Enable Detailed Tracing at API Level (Optional)
After enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you can activate detailed tracing for specific APIs you wish to monitor. To do so, edit the respective API definition and set the `detailed_tracing` option to either true or false.
```

Reviewer 3: I was about to write the same. I'd specify that this is optional and, if possible, add images (or a description, maybe?) showing the differences between a not detailed tracing and a detailed one. What do you think @sredxny?

EDIT: I saw you're already explaining the differences below. Still, I would clarify that this step is optional :)

#### What trace details to expect
- When set to false:
Setting detailed_tracing to `false` will generate a single span that encapsulates the entire request lifecycle. This span will include attributes and tags but will lack finer details. Specifically, it will not show metrics like the time taken for individual middleware executions. The single span will represent the total time elapsed from when the gateway receives the request to when a response is sent back to the client.

> 

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to have an example screenshot

- When set to true:
With `detailed_tracing` set to `true`, OpenTelemetry will create a span for each middleware involved in the request processing. These spans will offer detailed insights such as the time each middleware took to execute and the sequence in which they were invoked. The spans are displayed in a waterfall model, revealing the hierarchy and sequence of middleware execution. This includes pre-middlewares, post-middlewares, the round trip to the upstream server, and the response middlewares.

> 

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to have an example screenshot

By selecting the appropriate setting, you can customize the level of tracing detail to suit your monitoring needs.

## Understanding your traces
Gaining a comprehensive understanding of your traces requires diving into both the specific operations being performed and the context in which they are executed. This is where attributes and tags come into play. To fully benefit from OpenTelemetry's capabilities, it's essential to grasp the two main types of attributes: **Span Attributes** and **Resource Attributes**.

#### Resource Attributes

> In OpenTelemetry, resource attributes provide contextual information about the entity that produced the telemetry data. Unlike span attributes, which are specific to individual operations (e.g., requests in the case of a gateway), resource attributes are associated with the service or application as a whole.

Reviewer 2: Suggest to move "Span Attributes" section before "Resource Attributes", since in this description, it's making reference to span attributes.

| `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Bool     | Whether the Tyk Gateway is hybrid (`slave_options.use_rpc=true`) | HTTP Span |
| `tyk.gw.group.id`  | String   | Represents the `slave_options.group_id` of the gateway. Populated only if the gateway is hybrid. | HTTP Span |
| `tyk.gw.tags`      | []String | Represents the gateway `segment_tags`. Populated only if the gateway is segmented. | HTTP Span |

By understanding and using these resource attributes, you can gain better insights into your Tyk Gateway and service instances.

### Span Attributes
Span attributes offer information about a specific operation within a trace, such as a single API request. They can include metrics like how long an individual middleware took to execute, the HTTP method used in a request, and much more. By scrutinizing the span attributes, you can deduce the particulars of each operation, making it easier to pinpoint bottlenecks, errors, or other issues.
Tyk sets specific span attributes automatically:

- `tyk.api.name`: API name.
- `tyk.api.orgid`: Organization ID.
- `tyk.api.id`: API ID.
- `tyk.api.path`: API listen path.

> 
> When tagging is enabled in the API definition, tags are added as another span attribute. These are keyed as `tyk.api.tags`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `tyk.api.tags`: If tagging is enabled in the API definition, the tags are added here.
```

#### Common HTTP Span Attributes
Tyk follows the OpenTelemetry semantic conventions for HTTP spans. You can find detailed information on common attributes [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes).

Some of these common attributes include:

- `http.method`: HTTP request method.
- `http.scheme`: URL scheme.
- `http.status_code`: HTTP response status code.
- `http.url`: Full HTTP request URL.

For the full list and details, refer to the official [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes).

## Advanced OpenTelemetry Capabilities

> ### Context Propagation and Sampling
> Tyk supports context propagation as well as configurable sampling strategies through the Sampling configuration structure. Below are the options you can customize:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Context Propagation
Tyk supports context propagation 

### Sampling Strategies
Tyk supports configurable sampling strategies through the Sampling configuration structure. Below are the options you can customize:
```

Reviewer 2: Please add explanation for context propagation. Anything to configure there?

Reviewer 2: Please add which field to configure for sampling strategy.

Author: @caroltyk nothing to configure here, only sampling (type, rate, parentBased) which are described below. So, you think we should remove the text and jump directly into the explanation of the configs?

Reviewer 2: @sredxny I'd like to separate Context Propagation & Sampling Strategies as two Advanced Capabilities. For context propagation, just want to expand a bit about what does it mean.

> description: Overview page to introduce OpenTelemetry in Tyk

Reviewer: OpenTelemetry is always in one word, like this:

title: "OpenTelemetry"
tags: ["otel", "opentelemetry"]

Author: done!

---

> Since v5.2.+ Tyk now supports OpenTelemetry, a robust observability framework for cloud-native software. Enhance your API Gateway's monitoring capabilities with customizable traces and metrics.

Reviewer: Since version 5.2 of Tyk Gateway, you can now leverage the power of OpenTelemetry, a robust observability framework designed for cloud-native software. Enhance your API Gateway's monitoring capabilities with distributed tracing. 

(note: I removed metrics from the text, because we are not yet exposing OTel metrics from Tyk Gateway)

Author: makes sense, done

## Enabling OpenTelemetry in Two Steps

### Prerequisites

> Before proceeding with the following steps, ensure that you have configured your OpenTelemetry backend as well as any necessary integrations. To configure your first integration with the OpenTelemetry collector go [here].

Author: @dcs3spp that link is a link to the work being done by @mativm02 I guess we must merge first his job so I can point to a valid link?

### Step 1: Enable at Gateway Level
First, enable OpenTelemetry in the Tyk Gateway. You can do this by editing the Tyk Gateway configuration file like so:

```json
{
"opentelemetry": {
  "enabled": true
  }
}
```

You can also enable OpenTelemetry by setting the corresponding environment variable: `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED`.

> ### Step 2: Enable at API Level (Optional)

Reviewer: Enable detailed tracing at API level (optional)

Author: done!

> After enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you have the optional step of activating it for specific APIs you wish to monitor. If you choose to do this, edit the respective API definition and set the detailed_tracing option to either true or false. By default, this setting is set to false.

Reviewer: it makes it sound like you have to do it to get the trace for your API, but that's only required for detailed tracing, right?

So I would say something like: "After enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you have the optional step of activating detailed tracing for specific APIs you wish to get more details from."

Author: makes sense! applied the change

#### What trace details to expect
- When set to false:

> Setting detailed_tracing to `false` will generate a single span that encapsulates the entire request lifecycle. This span will include attributes and tags but will lack finer details. Specifically, it will not show metrics like the time taken for individual middleware executions. The single span will represent the total time elapsed from when the gateway receives the request to when a response is sent back to the client. In this case the trace will look as:

Reviewer: it will not show spans for the individual middleware executions. 

(using metrics here is confusing, because OTel use the concept of metrics in a different way)

With `detailed_tracing` set to `true`, OpenTelemetry will create a span for each middleware involved in the request processing. These spans will offer detailed insights such as the time each middleware took to execute and the sequence in which they were invoked. The spans are displayed in a waterfall model, revealing the hierarchy and sequence of middleware execution. This includes pre-middlewares, post-middlewares, the round trip to the upstream server, and the response middlewares. In this case the trace will look as:

{{< img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-true.png" alt="Detailed Tracing Enabled" width="800px" >}}

By selecting the appropriate setting, you can customize the level of tracing detail to suit your monitoring needs.

## Understanding your traces
Gaining a comprehensive understanding of your traces requires diving into both the specific operations being performed and the context in which they are executed. This is where attributes and tags come into play. To fully benefit from OpenTelemetry's capabilities, it's essential to grasp the two main types of attributes: **Span Attributes** and **Resource Attributes**.

### Span Attributes

> Span attributes offer information about a specific operation within a trace, such as a single API request. They can include metrics like how long an individual middleware took to execute, the HTTP method used in a request, and much more. By scrutinizing the span attributes, you can deduce the particulars of each operation, making it easier to pinpoint bottlenecks, errors, or other issues.

Reviewer: "They can include metrics like how long an individual middleware took to execute," => the span attributes doesn't contain metrics, those are only meta data.
But the span itself has a duration. Maybe you want to add a one liner about what a span is before you talk about span attributes?

"A span is a named, timed operation that represents an operation. Multiple spans represent different parts of the workflow and are pieced together to create a trace."

| `tyk.gw.group.id`  | String   | Represents the `slave_options.group_id` of the gateway. Populated only if the gateway is hybrid. | HTTP Span |
| `tyk.gw.tags`      | []String | Represents the gateway `segment_tags`. Populated only if the gateway is segmented. | HTTP Span |

By understanding and using these resource attributes, you can gain better insights into your Tyk Gateway and service instances.

#### Common HTTP Span Attributes
Tyk follows the OpenTelemetry semantic conventions for HTTP spans. You can find detailed information on common attributes [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes).

Some of these common attributes include:

- `http.method`: HTTP request method.
- `http.scheme`: URL scheme.
- `http.status_code`: HTTP response status code.
- `http.url`: Full HTTP request URL.

For the full list and details, refer to the official [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes).

## Advanced OpenTelemetry Capabilities

> ### Context Propagation

Reviewer 4: Maybe add an additional line between these two headings

This setting allows you to specify the type of context propagator to use for trace data. It's essential for ensuring compatibility and data integrity between different services in your architecture. The available options are:

> - **tracecontext**: This option supports the W3C Trace Context format. More information can be found at [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **tracecontext**: This option supports the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) format.
```

> - **b3**: This option serializes `SpanContext` to/from the B3 multi Headers format.

Reviewer 4: What is the B3 headers format? Should we add a link here?

The default setting is `tracecontext`. To configure this setting, you have two options:

- **Environment Variable**: Use `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_CONTEXTPROPAGATION` to specify the context propagator type.
- **Configuration File**: Navigate to the `opentelemetry.context_propagation` field in your configuration file to set your preferred option.

### Sampling Strategies

> Tyk supports configurable sampling strategies through the Sampling configuration structure. Below are the options you can customize:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tyk supports configuring the following sampling strategies via the Sampling configuration structure:
```

This setting dictates the sampling policy that OpenTelemetry uses to decide if a trace should be sampled for analysis. The decision is made at the start of a trace and applies throughout its lifetime. By default, the setting is `AlwaysOn`.

To customize, you can either set the `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_SAMPLING_TYPE` environment variable or modify the `opentelemetry.sampling.type` field in the Tyk Gateway configuration file. Valid values for this setting are:
- **AlwaysOn**: All traces are sampled.
- **AlwaysOff**: No traces are sampled.
- **TraceIDRatioBased**: Samples traces based on a specified ratio.

#### Sampling Rate
This field is crucial when the `Type` is configured to `TraceIDRatioBased`. It defines the fraction of traces that OpenTelemetry will aim to sample, and accepts a value between 0.0 and 1.0. For example, a `Rate` set to 0.5 implies that approximately 50% of the traces will be sampled. The default value is 0.5. To configure this setting, you have the following options:
- **Environment Variable**: Use `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_SAMPLING_RATE`.
- **Configuration File**: Update the `opentelemetry.sampling.rate` field in the configuration file.

#### ParentBased Sampling

> This option is useful for ensuring the sampling consistency between parent and child spans. Specifically, if a parent span is sampled, all its child spans will be sampled as well. This setting is particularly effective when used with `TraceIDRatioBased` as it helps to keep the entire transaction story together. Using `ParentBased` with `AlwaysOn` or `AlwaysOff` may not be as useful since in these cases, either all or no spans are sampled. The default value is false. Configuration options include:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This option is useful for ensuring the sampling consistency between parent and child spans. Specifically, if a parent span is sampled, all it's child spans will be sampled as well. This setting is particularly effective when used with `TraceIDRatioBased`, as it helps to keep the entire transaction story together. Using `ParentBased` with `AlwaysOn` or `AlwaysOff` may not be as useful, since in these cases, either all or no spans are sampled. The default value is `false`. Configuration options include:
```

- **Environment Variable**: Use `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_SAMPLING_PARENTBASED`.
- **Configuration File**: Update the `opentelemetry.sampling.parent_based` field in the configuration file.

### Configuring Connection to OpenTelemetry Backend
Choose between HTTP and gRPC for the backend connection by configuring the `exporter` field to "http" or "grpc".

### Further Configuration Details

> For more in-depth information on the configuration options available, please refer to our [OpenTelemetry Configuration Details Page](https://tyk.io/docs/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration/#opentelemetry).

Reviewer 4: Use relative links instead of absolute URLs

```suggestion
For more in-depth information on the configuration options available, please refer to our [OpenTelemetry Configuration Details Page]({{< ref "tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry" >}}).
```
